= Introduction

RISC-V was designed to provide a highly modular and extensible
instruction set, and includes a large and growing set of standard
extensions.  In addition, users may add their own custom
extensions. This flexibility can be used to highly optimize a
specialized design by including only the exact set of ISA features
required for an application, but the same flexibility also leads to a
combinatorial explosion in possible ISA choices.  Profiles specify a
much smaller common set of ISA choices that capture the most value for
most users, and which thereby enable the software community to focus
resources on building a rich software ecosystem with application and
operating system portability across different implementations.

NOTE: Another pragmatic concern is the long and unwieldy ISA strings
required to encode common sets of extensions, which will continue to
grow as new extensions are defined.

Each profile is built on a standard base ISA plus a set of mandatory
ISA extensions, and provides a small set of standard ISA options to
extend the mandatory components.  Profiles provide a convenient
shorthand for describing the ISA portions of hardware and software
platforms, and also guide the development of common software
toolchains shared by different platforms that use the same profile.
The intent is that the software ecosystem focus on supporting the
profiles' mandatory base and standard options, instead of attempting
to support every possible combination of individual extensions.
Similarly, hardware vendors should aim to structure their offerings
around standard profiles to increase the likelihood their designs will
have mainstream software support.

NOTE: Profiles are not intended to prohibit the use of combinations of
individual ISA extensions or the addition of custom extensions, which
can continue to be used for more specialized applications albeit
without the expectation of widespread software support or portability
between hardware platforms.

NOTE: As RISC-V evolves over time, the set of ISA features will grow,
and new platforms will be added that may need different profiles.  To
manage this evolution, RISC-V is adopting a model of regular annual
releases of new ISA profiles, following an ISA roadmap managed by the
RISC-V Technical Steering Committee.  The architecture profiles will
also be used for branding and to advertise compatibility with the
RISC-V standard.

This document describes the general structure of RISC-V architecture
profiles and also the specifics of the RVA20
architecture profile for application processors.
